Sudan: Deteriorating situation in El Fasher, health system collapsing nationwide https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/05/1150216

Lives at risk 

WHO’s warehouse in Al Gezirah state has been inaccessible since last December, he said, speaking in Geneva. 

“Some states, such as Darfur, have not received medical supplies for the past year,” he added.  

“People suffering from diabetes, hypertension, cancer or kidney failure may experience complications or die from the lack of treatment.”

Myanmar: UN rights office warns of growing crisis in Rakhine state https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/05/1150201

Shootings, beheadings, disappearances 

OHCHR documented renewed attacks on the Rohingya by both the Arakan Army and Myanmar military, the Tatmadaw, in the weeks leading up to the burning of Buthidaung. 

"Of course, many of these were as a result of airstrikes perpetrated by the military as well as other attacks perpetrated by unmanned aerial vehicles, or drones,” Mr. Rodehaver said.

“We’ve also received reports of shooting at unarmed fleeing villagers. We have confirmed at least four cases of beheadings and multiple enforced disappearances of individuals, as well as several villages and homes that have been burned.” 

Gaza: World court orders Israel to halt military operations in Rafah https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/05/1150196

This follows a request from South Africa in a pending case accusing Israel of violating its obligations under the Genocide Convention.

Reading the new provisional measures in an open session at the court in The Hague, ICJ Justice Nawaf Salam announced that Israel must abide by its obligations under the Genocide Convention to “immediately halt its military offensive and any other action in the Rafah governate which may inflict upon the Palestinian group in Gaza conditions of life that would bring about its physical destruction in whole and in part”.

The court issued that decision by 13 votes in favour to two against.

The new provisional measures came in response to South Africa’s request made on 10 May related to its initial accusations in December that Israel is violating its obligations under the Genocide Convention during the war in Gaza, which broke out after Hamas-led attacks on Israel in October that killed more than 1,200 people and left another 250 taken hostage. 

Israel’s military response has, to date, killed nearly 36,000 Palestinians and caused widespread destruction and a looming famine in the besieged and bombarded enclave.

Ukraine: Humanitarian, health needs soar as Kharkiv hostilities intensify https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/05/1150021

20,000 amputations 

Overall, WHO has recorded more than 1,700 attacks on health in the country since February 2022, Dr. Habicht said.

The UN health agency representative added that some 10 million people in the country are likely suffer from mental health conditions, while more than 20,000 amputations have been conducted since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion – “two areas [which] need support from many humanitarian and development partners and in the long term”.

While the intensification in hostilities in the Kharkiv region has driven humanitarian needs up “exponentially”, Dr. Habicht also highlighted the need to “think medium term to get ready for the winter to come”.

To ensure Ukraine's healthcare system can “continue functioning amidst prolonged adversity”, WHO has begun installing “modular heating units” in hospitals, including in Chernihiv and Odesa in the coming days and weeks, Dr. Habicht said.

But, responding to both immediate and medium-term needs and preparing the winter response has been a challenge due to a drop in humanitarian funding for Ukraine compared to the past two years.

According to OCHA, the UN’s $3.1 billion Humanitarian Needs and Response Plan for the country in 2024 remains only 23 per cent funded. UNHCR’s response in Ukraine and in neighbouring refugee-hosting countries is only 16 per cent funded, which, at the approach of the mid-year mark, is “abysmal”, Ms. Mantoo said.
